From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see API (disambiguation).
"Api.php" redirects here. For the Wikipedia API, see Special:ApiHelp.
An application programming interface (API) is a connection between computers or between computer programs. It is a type of software interface, offering a service to other pieces of software.[1] A document or standard that describes how to build such a connection or interface is called an API specification. A computer system that meets this standard is said to implement or expose an API. The term API may refer either to the specification or to the implementation.

In contrast to a user interface, which connects a computer to a person, an application programming interface connects computers or pieces of software to each other. It is not intended to be used directly by a person (the end user) other than a computer programmer[1] who is incorporating it into software. An API is often made up of different parts which act as tools or services that are available to the programmer. A program or a programmer that uses one of these parts is said to call that portion of the API. The calls that make up the API are also known as subroutines, methods, requests, or endpoints. An API specification defines these calls, meaning that it explains how to use or implement them.

One purpose of APIs is to hide the internal details of how a system works, exposing only those parts a programmer will find useful and keeping them consistent even if the internal details later change. An API may be custom-built for a particular pair of systems, or it may be a shared standard allowing interoperability among many systems.

The term API is often used to refer to web APIs,[2] which allow communication between computers that are joined by the internet. There are also APIs for programming languages, software libraries, computer operating systems, and computer hardware. APIs originated in the 1940s, though the term did not emerge until the 1960s and 70s.

Purpose
An API opens a software system to interactions from the outside. It allows two software systems to communicate across a boundary — an interface — using mutually agreed-upon signals.[3] In other words, an API connects software entities together. Unlike a user interface, an API is typically not visible to users. It is an "under the hood" portion of a software system, used for machine-to-machine communication.[4]

A well-designed API exposes only objects or actions needed by software or software developers. It hides details that have no use. This abstraction simplifies programming.[5]


Metaphorically, APIs connect software like interlocking blocks.
Building software using APIs has been compared to using building-block toys, such as Lego bricks. Software services or software libraries are analogous to the bricks; they may be joined together via their APIs, composing a new software product.[6] The process of joining is called integration.[3]

As an example, consider a weather sensor that offers an API. When a certain message is transmitted to the sensor, it will detect the current weather conditions and reply with a weather report. The message that activates the sensor is an API call, and the weather report is an API response.[7] A weather forecasting app might integrate with a number of weather sensor APIs, gathering weather data from throughout a geographical area.

An API is often compared to a contract. It represents an agreement between parties: a service provider who offers the API and the software developers who rely upon it. If the API remains stable, or if it changes only in predictable ways, developers' confidence in the API will increase. This may increase their use of the API.[8]

History of the term

A diagram from 1978 proposing the expansion of the idea of the API to become a general programming interface, beyond application programs alone[9]
The term API initially described an interface only for end-user-facing programs, known as application programs. This origin is still reflected in the name "application programming interface." Today, the term is broader, including also utility software and even hardware interfaces.[10]

The idea of the API is much older than the term itself. British computer scientists Maurice Wilkes and David Wheeler worked on a modular software library in the 1940s for EDSAC, an early computer. The subroutines in this library were stored on punched paper tape organized in a filing cabinet. This cabinet also contained what Wilkes and Wheeler called a "library catalog" of notes about each subroutine and how to incorporate it into a program. Today, such a catalog would be called an API (or an API specification or API documentation) because it instructs a programmer on how to use (or "call") each subroutine that the programmer needs.[10]

Wilkes and Wheeler's book The Preparation of Programs for an Electronic Digital Computer contains the first published API specification. Joshua Bloch considers that Wilkes and Wheeler "latently invented" the API, because it is more of a concept that is discovered than invented.[10]


Although the people who coined the term API were implementing software on a Univac 1108, the goal of their API was to make hardware independent programs possible.[11]
The term "application program interface" (without an -ing suffix) is first recorded in a paper called Data structures and techniques for remote computer graphics presented at an AFIPS conference in 1968.[12][10] The authors of this paper use the term to describe the interaction of an application—a graphics program in this case—with the rest of the computer system. A consistent application interface (consisting of Fortran subroutine calls) was intended to free the programmer from dealing with idiosyncrasies of the graphics display device, and to provide hardware independence if the computer or the display were replaced.[11]

The term was introduced to the field of databases by C. J. Date[13] in a 1974 paper called The Relational and Network Approaches: Comparison of the Application Programming Interface.[14] An API became a part of the ANSI/SPARC framework for database management systems. This framework treated the application programming interface separately from other interfaces, such as the query interface. Database professionals in the 1970s observed these different interfaces could be combined; a sufficiently rich application interface could support the other interfaces as well.[9]

This observation led to APIs that supported all types of programming, not just application programming. By 1990, the API was defined simply as "a set of services available to a programmer for performing certain tasks" by technologist Carl Malamud.[15]


Screenshot of Web API documentation written by NASA
The idea of the API was expanded again with the dawn of remote procedure calls and web APIs. As computer networks became common in the 1970s and 80s, programmers wanted to call libraries located not only on their local computers, but on computers located elsewhere. These remote procedure calls were well supported by the Java language in particular. In the 1990s, with the spread of the internet, standards like CORBA, COM, and DCOM competed to become the most common way to expose API services.[16]

Roy Fielding's dissertation Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures at UC Irvine in 2000 outlined Representational state transfer (REST) and described the idea of a "network-based Application Programming Interface" that Fielding contrasted with traditional "library-based" APIs.[17] XML and JSON web APIs saw widespread commercial adoption beginning in 2000 and continuing as of 2021. The web API is now the most common meaning of the term API.[2]

The Semantic Web proposed by Tim Berners-Lee in 2001 included "semantic APIs" that recast the API as an open, distributed data interface rather than a software behavior interface.[18] Proprietary interfaces and agents became more widespread than open ones, but the idea of the API as a data interface took hold. Because web APIs are widely used to exchange data of all kinds online, API has become a broad term describing much of the communication on the internet.[16] When used in this way, the term API has overlap in meaning with the term communication protocol.

Types
Libraries and frameworks
The interface to a software library is one type of API. The API describes and prescribes the "expected behavior" (a specification) while the library is an "actual implementation" of this set of rules.

A single API can have multiple implementations (or none, being abstract) in the form of different libraries that share the same programming interface.

The separation of the API from its implementation can allow programs written in one language to use a library written in another. For example, because Scala and Java compile to compatible bytecode, Scala developers can take advantage of any Java API.[19]

API use can vary depending on the type of programming language involved. An API for a procedural language such as Lua could consist primarily of basic routines to execute code, manipulate data or handle errors while an API for an object-oriented language, such as Java, would provide a specification of classes and its class methods.[20][21] Hyrum's law states that "With a sufficient number of users of an API, it does not matter what you promise in the contract: all observable behaviors of your system will be depended on by somebody."[22] Meanwhile, several studies show that most applications that use an API tend to use a small part of the API.[23]

Language bindings are also APIs. By mapping the features and capabilities of one language to an interface implemented in another language, a language binding allows a library or service written in one language to be used when developing in another language.[24] Tools such as SWIG and F2PY, a Fortran-to-Python interface generator, facilitate the creation of such interfaces.[25]

An API can also be related to a software framework: a framework can be based on several libraries implementing several APIs, but unlike the normal use of an API, the access to the behavior built into the framework is mediated by extending its content with new classes plugged into the framework itself.

Moreover, the overall program flow of control can be out of the control of the caller and in the framework's hands by inversion of control or a similar mechanism.[26][27]

Operating systems
An API can specify the interface between an application and the operating system.[28] POSIX, for example, specifies a set of common APIs that aim to enable an application written for a POSIX conformant operating system to be compiled for another POSIX conformant operating system.

Linux and Berkeley Software Distribution are examples of operating systems that implement the POSIX APIs.[29]

Microsoft has shown a strong commitment to a backward-compatible API, particularly within its Windows API (Win32) library, so older applications may run on newer versions of Windows using an executable-specific setting called "Compatibility Mode".[30] How much Microsoft developers' access to the company's operating systems' internal APIs is an advantage is unclear. Richard A. Shaffer of Technologic Computer Letter in 1987 compared the situation to a baseball game in which "Microsoft owns all the bats and the field",[31] but Ed Esber of Ashton-Tate said in an interview that year that Bill Gates told him that his developers sometimes had to rewrite software based on early APIs. Gates noted in the interview that Microsoft's Apple Macintosh applications were more successful than those for MS-DOS, because his company did not have to also devote resources to Mac OS.[32]

An API differs from an application binary interface (ABI) in that an API is source code based while an ABI is binary based. For instance, POSIX provides APIs while the Linux Standard Base provides an ABI.[33][34]

Remote APIs
Remote APIs allow developers to manipulate remote resources through protocols, specific standards for communication that allow different technologies to work together, regardless of language or platform. For example, the Java Database Connectivity API allows developers to query many different types of databases with the same set of functions, while the Java remote method invocation API uses the Java Remote Method Protocol to allow invocation of functions that operate remotely, but appear local to the developer.[35][36]

Therefore, remote APIs are useful in maintaining the object abstraction in object-oriented programming; a method call, executed locally on a proxy object, invokes the corresponding method on the remote object, using the remoting protocol, and acquires the result to be used locally as a return value.

A modification of the proxy object will also result in a corresponding modification of the remote object.[37]

Web APIs
Main article: Web API
Web APIs are the defined interfaces through which interactions happen between an enterprise and applications that use its assets, which also is a Service Level Agreement (SLA) to specify the functional provider and expose the service path or URL for its API users. An API approach is an architectural approach that revolves around providing a program interface to a set of services to different applications serving different types of consumers.[38]

When used in the context of web development, an API is typically defined as a set of specifications, such as Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) request messages, along with a definition of the structure of response messages, usually in an Extensible Markup Language (XML) or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format. An example might be a shipping company API that can be added to an eCommerce-focused website to facilitate ordering shipping services and automatically include current shipping rates, without the site developer having to enter the shipper's rate table into a web database. While "web API" historically has been virtually synonymous with web service, the recent[when?] trend (so-called Web 2.0) has been moving away from Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) based web services and service-oriented architecture (SOA) towards more direct representational state transfer (REST) style web resources and resource-oriented architecture (ROA).[39] Part of this trend is related to the Semantic Web movement toward Resource Description Framework (RDF), a concept to promote web-based ontology engineering technologies. Web APIs allow the combination of multiple APIs into new applications known as mashups.[40] In the social media space, web APIs have allowed web communities to facilitate sharing content and data between communities and applications. In this way, content that is created in one place dynamically can be posted and updated to multiple locations on the web.[41] For example, Twitter's REST API allows developers to access core Twitter data and the Search API provides methods for developers to interact with Twitter Search and trends data.[42]

Design
The design of an API has significant impact on its usage.[5] The principle of information hiding describes the role of programming interfaces as enabling modular programming by hiding the implementation details of the modules so that users of modules need not understand the complexities inside the modules.[43] Thus, the design of an API attempts to provide only the tools a user would expect.[5] The design of programming interfaces represents an important part of software architecture, the organization of a complex piece of software.[44]

Release policies
APIs are one of the more common ways technology companies integrate. Those that provide and use APIs are considered as being members of a business ecosystem.[45]

The main policies for releasing an API are:[46]

Private: The API is for internal company use only.
Partner: Only specific business partners can use the API. For example, vehicle for hire companies such as Uber and Lyft allow approved third-party developers to directly order rides from within their apps. This allows the companies to exercise quality control by curating which apps have access to the API, and provides them with an additional revenue stream.[47]
Public: The API is available for use by the public. For example, Microsoft makes the Windows API public, and Apple releases its API Cocoa, so that software can be written for their platforms. Not all public APIs are generally accessible by everybody. For example, Internet service providers like Cloudflare or Voxility, use RESTful APIs to allow customers and resellers access to their infrastructure information, DDoS stats, network performance or dashboard controls.[48] Access to such APIs is granted either by “API tokens”, or customer status validations.[49]
Public API implications
An important factor when an API becomes public is its "interface stability". Changes to the API—for example adding new parameters to a function call—could break compatibility with the clients that depend on that API.[50]

When parts of a publicly presented API are subject to change and thus not stable, such parts of a particular API should be documented explicitly as "unstable". For example, in the Google Guava library, the parts that are considered unstable, and that might change soon, are marked with the Java annotation @Beta.[51]

A public API can sometimes declare parts of itself as deprecated or rescinded. This usually means that part of the API should be considered a candidate for being removed, or modified in a backward incompatible way. Therefore, these changes allow developers to transition away from parts of the API that will be removed or not supported in the future.[52]

Client code may contain innovative or opportunistic usages that were not intended by the API designers. In other words, for a library with a significant user base, when an element becomes part of the public API, it may be used in diverse ways.[53] On February 19, 2020, Akamai published their annual “State of the Internet” report, showcasing the growing trend of cybercriminals targeting public API platforms at financial services worldwide. From December 2017 through November 2019, Akamai witnessed 85.42 billion credential violation attacks. About 20%, or 16.55 billion, were against hostnames defined as API endpoints. Of these, 473.5 million have targeted financial services sector organizations.[54]

API Documentation
API documentation describes what services an API offers and how to use those services, aiming to cover everything a client would need to know for practical purposes.

Documentation is crucial for the development and maintenance of applications using the API.[55] API documentation is traditionally found in documentation files but can also be found in social media such as blogs, forums, and Q&A websites.[56]

Traditional documentation files are often presented via a documentation system, such as Javadoc or Pydoc, that has a consistent appearance and structure. However, the types of content included in the documentation differs from API to API.[57]

In the interest of clarity, API documentation may include a description of classes and methods in the API as well as "typical usage scenarios, code snippets, design rationales, performance discussions, and contracts", but implementation details of the API services themselves are usually omitted. It can take a number of forms, including instructional documents, tutorials, and reference works. It'll also include a variety of information types, including guides and functionalities.

Restrictions and limitations on how the API can be used are also covered by the documentation. For instance, documentation for an API function could note that its parameters cannot be null, that the function itself is not thread safe.[58] Because API documentation tends to be comprehensive, it is a challenge for writers to keep the documentation updated and for users to read it carefully, potentially yielding bugs.[50]

API documentation can be enriched with metadata information like Java annotations. This metadata can be used by the compiler, tools, and by the run-time environment to implement custom behaviors or custom handling.[59]

It is possible to generate API documentation in a data-driven manner. By observing many programs that use a given API, it is possible to infer the typical usages, as well the required contracts and directives.[60] Then, templates can be used to generate natural language from the mined data.

Dispute over copyright protection for APIs
Main article: Google LLC v. Oracle America, Inc.
In 2010, Oracle Corporation sued Google for having distributed a new implementation of Java embedded in the Android operating system.[61] Google had not acquired any permission to reproduce the Java API, although permission had been given to the similar OpenJDK project. Judge William Alsup ruled in the Oracle v. Google case that APIs cannot be copyrighted in the U.S. and that a victory for Oracle would have widely expanded copyright protection to a "functional set of symbols" and allowed the copyrighting of simple software commands:

To accept Oracle's claim would be to allow anyone to copyright one version of code to carry out a system of commands and thereby bar all others from writing its different versions to carry out all or part of the same commands.[62][63]

Alsup's ruling was overturned in 2014 on appeal to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, though the question of whether such use of APIs constitutes fair use was left unresolved.[64][65]

In 2016, following a two-week trial, a jury determined that Google's reimplementation of the Java API constituted fair use, but Oracle vowed to appeal the decision.[66] Oracle won on its appeal, with the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit ruling that Google's use of the APIs did not qualify for fair use.[67] In 2019, Google appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States over both the copyrightability and fair use rulings, and the Supreme Court granted review.[68] Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the oral hearings in the case were delayed until October 2020.[69]

The case was decided by the Supreme Court in Google's favor.[70]

Examples
Main category: Application programming interfaces
ASPI for SCSI device interfacing
Cocoa and Carbon for the Macintosh
DirectX for Microsoft Windows
EHLLAPI
Java APIs
ODBC for Microsoft Windows
OpenAL cross-platform sound API
OpenCL cross-platform API for general-purpose computing for CPUs & GPUs
OpenGL cross-platform graphics API
OpenMP API that supports multi-platform shared memory multiprocessing programming in C, C++, and Fortran on many architectures, including Unix and Microsoft Windows platforms.
Server application programming interface (SAPI)
Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL)
See also
API testing
API writer
Application binary interface
Augmented web
Calling convention
Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA)
Comparison of application virtual machines
Document Object Model (DOM)
Double-chance function
Foreign function interface
Front and back ends
Interface (computing)
Interface control document
List of 3D graphics APIs
Microservices
Name mangling
Open API
Open Service Interface Definitions
Parsing
Plugin
RAML (software)
Software development kit (SDK)
Web API
Web content vendor
XPCO

What is an API?
An API, or application programming interface, is a set of rules or protocols that enables software applications to communicate with each other to exchange data, features and functionality.

APIs simplify and accelerate application and software development by enabling developers to integrate data, services and capabilities from other applications, instead of developing them from scratch. APIs give application owners a simple, secure way to make application data and functions available to both internal and external API consumers.

APIs are predefined interfaces that share only the necessary data and functions for specific queries. Servers do not have to fully expose data—APIs enable the sharing of small packets of data, relevant to the specific request. They keep other internal system details hidden, which helps preserve the integrity of system security. 

Successful API adoption, integration and management is driven by comprehensive, well-maintained API documentation. API documentation is like a technical instruction manual that provides details about an API (such as supported protocols, languages and authentication methods) and information for developers on how to work with an API and its services. Well-designed documentation promotes a better API experience for users and generally makes for more successful APIs.

Think Newsletter

Join over 100,000 subscribers who read the latest news in tech
Stay up to date on the most important—and intriguing—industry trends on AI, automation, data and beyond with the Think newsletter. See the IBM Privacy Statement.

Business email
johndoe@yourdomain.com
Subscribe

How do APIs work?
It’s useful to think about API communication in terms of a request and response between a client and server. The application submitting the request is the client, and the server provides the response. The API is the bridge establishing the connection between them.

A simple way to understand how APIs work is to look at a common example, third-party payment processing. When a user purchases a product on an e-commerce site, the site might prompt the user to “Pay with PayPal” or another type of third-party system. This function relies on APIs to make the connection.

When the buyer clicks the payment button, an API call is sent to retrieve information. This is the request. This request is processed from an application to the web server through the API’s Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) and includes a request verb, headers, and sometimes, a request body.
 

After receiving a valid request from the product webpage, the API calls to the external program or web server, in this case, the third-party payment system.
 

The server sends a response to the API with the requested information.
 

The API transfers the data to the initial requesting application, in this case, the product website.

While the data transfer differs depending on the web service used, the requests and responses all happen through an API. There is no visibility on the user interface, meaning APIs exchange data within the computer or application, and appear to the user as a seamless connection.

API Connect

IBM API Connect Developer Portal
IBM API Connect Developer Portal
See how the API Connect Developer Portal empowers you to share, manage, and customize APIs for your developers—accelerating integration and collaboration with a secure, scalable platform.

Explore the developer portal 
Types of APIs
APIs can be categorized by use case, including data APIs, operating system APIs, remote APIs and web APIs.

Web APIs
Web APIs enable the transfer of data and functionality over the internet using HTTP protocol.

Today, most APIs are web APIs. Web APIs are a type of remote API (meaning that the API uses protocols to manipulate external resources) that expose an application's data and functionality over the internet.

The four main types of web APIs are:

Open APIs
Open APIs are open-source application programming interfaces you can access with the HTTP protocol. Also known as public APIs, they have defined API endpoints and request and response formats.

Partner APIs
Partner APIs connect strategic business partners. Typically, developers access these APIs in self-service mode through a public API developer portal. Still, they need to complete an onboarding process and get login credentials to access partner APIs.

Internal APIs
Internal, or private, APIs remain hidden from external users. These private APIs aren't available for users outside of the company. Instead, organizations use them to improve productivity and communication across different internal development teams.

Composite APIs
Composite APIs combine multiple data or service APIs. They allow programmers to access several endpoints in a single call. Composite APIs are useful in microservices architecture where running a single task might require information from several sources.

Other types of APIs
Less common types of APIs include:

Data (or database) APIs, used to connect applications and database management systems

Operating system (or local) APIs, used to define how apps use operating system services and resources

Remote APIs, used to define how applications on different devices interact
API examples
Because APIs allow organizations to open access to their resources while maintaining security and control, they have become a valuable aspect of modern business and personal applications.

Here are some API examples that users often encounter:

Universal logins
A popular API example is the function that enables people to log in to websites by using their Facebook, X, or Google profile login details. This convenient feature allows any website to use an API from one of the more popular services for quick authentication. This capability helps save users the time and hassle of setting up a new profile for every web application or new membership.

Internet of Things (IoT)
These “smart devices” offer added functionality, such as internet-enabled touchscreens and data collection, through APIs. For example, a smart fridge can connect to recipe applications or take and send notes to mobile phones through text message. Internal cameras connect to various applications so that users can see the contents of the refrigerator from anywhere.

Travel booking comparisons
Travel booking sites aggregate thousands of flights, showcasing the cheapest options for every date and destination. APIs enable this service by providing application users access to the latest information about availability from hotels and airlines.

This access is available either through a web browser or the travel booking company’s own application. With an autonomous exchange of data and requests, APIs dramatically reduce the time and effort involved in checking for available flights or accommodation.

Navigation apps
Navigation apps use core APIs that display static or interactive maps. These apps also use other APIs and features to provide users with directions, speed limits, points of interest, traffic warnings and more. Users communicate with an API when plotting travel routes or tracking items on the move, such as a delivery vehicle.

Social media
Social media companies use APIs to allow other entities to share and embed content featured on social media apps to their own sites. For example, the Instagram API enables businesses to embed their Instagram grid on their website and for the grid to update automatically as users add new posts.

SaaS applications
APIs are an integral part of the growth in software as a service (SaaS) products. Platforms like CRMs (customer relationship management tools) often include several built-in APIs that let companies integrate with applications they already use, such as messaging, social media and email apps.

This integration drastically reduces time spent switching between applications for sales and marketing tasks. It also helps reduce or prevent data silos that might exist between departments that use different applications.

API protocols, architectural styles and languages
Traditionally, API referred to an interface connected to an application created with any of the low-level programming languages, such as JavaScript. However, modern APIs vary in their architectures and use of data formats. They are typically built for HTTP, resulting in developer-friendly interfaces that are easily accessible and widely understood by applications written in Java, Ruby, Python and many other languages.

As the use of web APIs has increased, it has led to the development and use of certain protocols, styles, standards and languages. These structures provide users with a set of defined rules, or API specifications, that create accepted data types, commands and syntax. In effect, these API protocols facilitate standardized information exchange.

SOAP (simple object access protocol)
SOAP is a lightweight XML-based messaging protocol specification that enables endpoints to send and receive data through a range of communication protocols including SMTP (simple mail transfer protocol) and HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol.) SOAP is independent, which allows SOAP APIs to share information between apps or software components running in different environments or written in different languages.

Remote procedure call (RPC)
Remote procedure call (RPC) is a protocol that provides the high-level communications paradigm used in the operating system. RPC presumes the existence of a low-level transport protocol, such as transmission control protocol/internet protocol (TCP/IP) or user datagram protocol (UDP), for carrying the message data between communicating programs.

RPC implements a logical client-to-server communications system designed specifically for the support of network applications. The RPC protocol enables users to work with remote procedures as if the procedures were local.1

XML-RPC (XML- remote procedure call)
The XML-RPC protocol relies on a specific XML format to transfer data. XML-RPC is older than SOAP, but simpler, and relatively lightweight in that it uses minimum bandwidth.

JSON-RPC
Like XML-RPC, JSON-RPC is a remote procedure call, that uses JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) instead of XML. JSON is a lightweight format for data exchange that is simple to parse and uses name/value pairs and ordered lists of values. Because JSON uses universal data structures, it can be used with any programming language.

gRPC
gRPC is a high-performance, open-source RPC framework initially developed by Google. gRPC uses the network protocol HTTP/2 and Protocol Buffers data format and is commonly used to connect services in a microservices architecture.

WebSocket
WebSocket APIs enable bidirectional communication between client and server. This type of API does not require a new connection to be established for each communication, once the connection is established it allows for continuous exchange. This makes Web Socket APIs ideal for real-time communication.

REST (representational state transfer)
REST is a set of web API architecture principles. REST APIs, also known as RESTful APIs, are APIs that adhere to certain REST architectural constraints. REST APIs use HTTP requests such as GET, PUT, HEAD and DELETE to interact with resources. REST makes data available as resources, with each resource represented by a unique URI. Clients request a resource by providing its URI.

REST APIs are stateless, they do not save client data between requests. It’s possible to build RESTful APIs with SOAP protocols, but practitioners usually view the two standards as competing specifications.

GraphQL
GraphQL is an open-source query language and server-side runtime that specifies how clients should interact with APIs.2 GraphQL allows users to make API requests with just a few lines, rather than having to access complex endpoints with many parameters. This capability can make it easier to generate and respond to API queries, particularly more complex or specific requests that target multiple resources.

REST vs. SOAP
SOAP and REST represent different approaches to API design, describing rules and standards for how an API should interact with other applications. SOAP is a protocol while REST is a set of constraints that constitute an architectural style. Both use HTTP to exchange information.

REST is often considered a simpler alternative to SOAP because it is lightweight, flexible, transparent and relatively easy to use; SOAP requires users to write more code to complete each task than REST requires.

SOAP is more deterministic and robust (due to type checking), and proponents make the case that it is easier to use because of the SOAP support built into many development tools.3 SOAP features built-in compliance, and developers often consider it a more secure protocol, better suited for situations with strict data integrity requirements.

RESTful systems support messaging in different formats, such as plain text, HTML, YAML, XML and JSON, while SOAP only allows XML. Each has their strengths, and the “right choice,” might depend on use case. However, the ability to support multiple formats for storing and exchanging data is one of the reasons REST is a prevailing choice for building public APIs.

REST vs. GraphQL
GraphQL is a query language and API runtime that Facebook developed internally in 2012 before it became open source in 2015. GraphQL and REST are both stateless, use a client/server model and use HTTP. GraphQL solves for some limitations of REST, for example, providing the ability to more accurately target wanted resources with a single request.

REST APIs follows a fixed structure, and always return a whole data set for a specified object. If the request is more complex, spanning multiple resources, for example, the client must submit separate requests for each resource. These limitations can lead to under or over-fetching issues.

Neither REST nor GraphQL APIs are inherently superior. They’re different tools that are suited to different tasks.

REST is generally easier to implement and can be a good choice when a straightforward, cacheable communication protocol with stringent access controls is preferred (for public-facing e-commerce sites like Shopify and GitHub, as one example).

GraphQL APIs enable more flexible, efficient data fetching, which can improve system performance and ease-of-use for developers. These features make GraphQL especially useful for building APIs in complex environments with rapidly changing front-end requirements.4

APIs, web services and microservices
APIs vs. web services
A web service is an internet software component that facilitates data transfers over a network. Because a web service exposes an application’s data and functionality to other applications, in effect, every web service is an API. However, not every API is a web service.

APIs are any software component that serves as an intermediary between two disconnected applications. While web services also connect applications, they require a network to do so. Web services are typically private and only approved users can access them.

APIs, microservices and cloud-native development
Microservices is an architectural style that divides an application into smaller, independent components, often connected by using REST APIs. Building an application as a collection of separate services enables developers to work on one application component independent of the others, and makes applications easier to test, maintain and scale.

Microservices architecture has become more prevalent with the rise of cloud computing and, together with containers and Kubernetes, is foundational to cloud-native application development.

API benefits
APIs simplify the design and development of new applications and services, and the integration and management of existing ones. They also offer significant benefits to developers and organizations at large.

Improved collaboration
The average enterprise uses almost 1,200 cloud applications, many of which are disconnected. APIs enable integration so that these platforms and apps can seamlessly communicate with one another. Through this integration, companies can automate workflows and improve workplace collaboration. Without APIs, many enterprises would lack connectivity, causing information silos that compromise productivity and performance.

Accelerated innovation
APIs offer flexibility, allowing companies to make connections with new business partners and offer new services to their existing market. This flexibility also enables companies to access new markets that can boost returns and drive digital transformation.

For example, the company Stripe began as an API with just seven lines of code. The company has since worked with many of the biggest enterprises in the world. Stripe has diversified to offer loans and corporate cards, and received a recent valuation of USD 65 billion .

Data monetization
Many companies choose to offer APIs for free, at least initially, so that they can build an audience of developers around their brand and forge relationships with potential partners. If the API grants access to valuable digital assets, a business monetizes it by selling access. This practice is referred to as the API economy.

When AccuWeather started its self-service developer portal to sell a wide range of API packages, it took just 10 months to attract 24,000 developers, selling 11,000 API keys. This move helped to build a thriving community in the process.

System security
APIs separate the requesting application from the infrastructure of the responding service and offer layers of security between the two as they communicate. For example, API calls typically require authentication credentials. HTTP headers, cookies or query strings can provide additional security during data exchange. An API gateway can control access to further minimize security threats.

User security and privacy
APIs provide added protection within a network. They can also provide another layer of protection for personal users. When a website requests a user’s location (a location API provides this information), the user can decide whether to allow or deny this request.

Many web browsers and desktop and mobile operating systems have built-in permission structures. When an app must access files through an API, operating systems such as iOS, macOS, Windows and Linux use permissions for that access.

